# Smoketest
The smoketest is an integration-style test designed to run intermittently or on-demand in Github Actions, not on each push or PR.

The smoketest exercises the end-to-end operation of a CM Service campaign without depending on payload tasks to complete successfully, i.e., no butler, bps, pipetask, or other payload task is actually executed during the smoketest. Instead, payload commands found in any launcher script generated by the test is "replaced" by a single multi-tool entrypoint (`rubin.py`) that either exits as a no-op or produces a minimal amount of side effects (touching a file, faking a log message, etc.) necessary for CM Service to accept the task as complete and successful.

The components of the smoketest are defined in the project's `docker-compose.yaml` and extended by the compose files in `integration/`. These components include:

- CM Service API Server
- CM Service Daemon
- CM Web Server (not exercised by smoketest)
- Postgres Database (CM)
- Postgres Database (Butler)
- HTCondor (all-in-one, or "mini")
- Object Store (S3 Mock)

In addition to these services, three init containers provided seed data for the smoketest:

- `db-migrate`, which performs CM Service database migrations in the PostgreSQL instance.
- `butler-init`, which creates and seeds a minimal Butler registry in the PostgreSQL instance.
- `s3mock-seed`, which uploads seed files to the bucket created by the S3 Mock service.

Externally, the following artifacts are necessary for the operation of the smoketest:

- `smoketest.yaml`, the scheduled campaign template defining the integration test campaign.
- `.github/workflows/smoketest.yaml`, the github workflow file defining the steps of the integration test campaign.
- `integration/aws.d/*`, the AWS config and credentials file supplying configuration to `boto3` and its consumers.
- `CM_RUBIN_ORG_TOKEN`, an environment variable that contains a non-production HTCondor ID token used to authenticate the cm user.
- `POOL_PASSWORD`, an environment variable that contains the hex-encoded bytes of the non-production HTCondor signing key.

Note: If either of the HTCondor shared secrets need to be regenerated, both must be replaced.

The workflow for the smoketest campaign is:

1. The `smoketest.yaml` campaign file is "loaded" by the cm cli into the api server.
1. The resulting schedule is "oneshot" triggered by the cm cli.
1. The resulting campaign is set to "running" by default.
1. The campaign status is read from the api until the status is "accepted", "failed", or a timeout elapses.

The steps in the campaign are designed to exercise the following functionality in addition to the table stakes of evolving a campaign from start to finish:

- Step-group partitioning by Butler Query
- Step obtaining a 3rd-party resource from an S3 bucket given a resource path URL.
- Campaign template expression rendering at schedule trigger and execution time.
- Submission to and job checking from HTCondor services (collector, schedd), using ID token authentication.

The smoketest campaign is designed to and is meant to succeed. This test does not exercise step recovery, error checking, or other tasks associated with failure and recovery.

## Execution
The smoketest should be scheduled for weekly execution in Github Actions and should be available for manual triggers via the Github UI if it is present in the default repo.

The smoketest can be triggered with the `gh` cli tool, e.g., for the checked-out branch:

```
gh workflow run .github/workflows/smoketest.yaml --ref $(git branch --show-current)
```

### Runtime
The smoketest should run in around 7-10 minutes, most of which is spent building, starting, and waiting for healthy service disposition from docker compose (5 minutes). Because the daemon is configured for a short iteration timer, the campaign will finish relatively quickly once started (2 minutes).

## Artifacts
On failure or timeout, the smoketest will include as artifacts the output of `docker compose logs` and `docker compose ps` to aid troubleshooting.
