- `campaign`: A complete end-to-end data processing workflow.
- `manifest`: A kind-specific configuration document that defines the parameters available to a campaign node, step, or group.
Each kind of manifest supports difference configuration parameters and controls the generation of artifacts used by BPS and other launchers. A manifest may be configured at the group, step, campaign, or library level. See `configuration chain`.
- `library`: A generic, "global" manifest of a particular kind used as a fallback of last resort in a configuration chain.
A Library manifest is always "version 0" and are read-only.
- `graph`
- `node`: A Node is a single atomic unit in a campaign graph.
A Node is usually a step or a group, but can also be a breakpoint or start/end marker.
Additional types of nodes may be introduced to CM Service to perform more specific operations as a campaign progresses.
- `step`: A Step is a graph node that specifically represents a unit of LSST Pipeline work -- which could be a pipeline task, step, or stage -- any unit of pipeline work representable by a single "Pipeline YAML" declaration can be a `step`.
- `group`: Every `step` in a campaign graph is broken out into one or more `group`s.
A group inherits all its configuration from the step that generated it, including the "Pipeline YAML" declaration, and differs only in the Butler data query that constrains the data IDs used by the group.
Groups are the unit of parallelization for executing campaign graphs.
- `collect`: Since every `step` "fans out" into one or more `groups`, the `collect` Node is the "fan in" operation that builds Butler collections that gather together all the output run collections of its ancestor groups. A `collect` node also serves as a checkpoint in the campaign graph, since every ancestor group must be completed before the `collect` node can start.
- `configuration chain`: Every group's configuration is generated by a "chain" of manifests. For every configuration parameter a group uses from a manifest, each manifest in the "chain" is checked until the parameter is found. The ordering of this "chain" is from most specific to most general: group -> step -> campaign -> library.
- `launcher`: A launcher is the mechanism CM Service uses to perform work. For example, to run a "bps submit" command for a group, CM Service first writes a BASH script artifact that calls "bps submit" and then uses a `launcher` to run that script. A common launcher is the HTCondor launcher, which submits the script as a job to an HTCondor Schedd host in the local universe.
- `version`: Many objects in CM Service are versioned, especially manifests and nodes. Versions provide a history and provenance for tracking changes made to a campaign's elements. CM Service does not support branching versions, so the latest version of any object is always the newest, but nodes track in their metadata which version of a manifest was used to produce the node's configuration.
